Hello, everyone.
Good afternoon.
And welcome to the new compiler
technologies on future direction session.
This session is for everyone
that cares about their compiler.
And everyone should care
about their compiler.
And it looks like you got the
message because you came in a
very large number to this session.
We believe that every
developer on Mac OS X should
care about their compiler.
What should they care?
Well, compilers do their job in
a more or less great way,
depending on the configuration
they are passed and the
characteristics of the system.
We believe that there is no easier
way to squeeze out the last 10% of the
performance of your killer applications
than by tweaking your compiler.
This session is going to... Oh, okay,
I already clicked on that.
Perhaps you're after
improving your performance.
As Andreas talked about
in the State of the Union,
perhaps you just care about the
pure speed of your execution code.
Or is it more about minimizing
the memory footprint of your
application on a cool new iPhone?
or compilation time in your build form.
Are you looking after the latest security
features that the compiler could provide?
or CPU load?
Do you care about load balancing the
CPU load on your multi-core architecture?
With the right configuration,
you can get the most of your
compiler on our platforms.
It should be quite easy to achieve this.
We have a few guidelines
we can help you through.
And this is what this session is about.
So our agenda of the day is quite simple.
First,
we are going to take an unusual look at
the iPhone SDK from the compiler angle.
Then we will move on to
Mac OS X and the great compiler
choice you have in Xcode 3.1.
will go into more detail on GCC 4.2
and on the brand new LLVM compiler.
For once, you'll get forward-looking
statements about our compiler
strategy moving forward beyond
Xcode 3.1 and Snow Leopard.
This session is shaping up
as one of the best compiler
sessions we've had in a long time.
We have tons to talk about.
and I'm really proud to have
two excellent presenters,
which also double up as
experts in their fields.
Eric Christopher and Chris Lattner.
But you can judge by yourself because
it's time for Eric Christopher to
come up on stage now and talk
about the iPhone SDK compiler.
Thanks, Francois.
I'm not really sure I can quite live up
to that glowing recommendation there,
but I would like to start off by
talking a little bit about iPhone
OS development and really what it means.
Now, whether or not you're new to
the Mac platform or whether
you're a seasoned developer,
a lot of you are here trying to
figure out how the compiler and
the hardware inside the iPhone
is going to affect what you do.
So I'd like to really start
off a little bit by talking
about the iPhone internals,
the ARM processor,
and how it is going to affect
the code that comes out of the
compiler and what you do about that.
So the processor itself is pretty simple.
It's an ILP32 processor.
What that means, integers, longs,
and pointers are all 32-bit.
It's a little Indian, just like the x86.
It's a low-power risk processor
that's heavily used in mobile devices.
It's a little bit more complex
than the ARM processor,
but it's a little bit more
complex than the ARM processor.
And it supports two computation modes,
ARM mode and thumb mode.
So, all right, well, what are those?
The ARM processor mode is the larger
of the two set of instruction sets.
It's a 32-bit instruction set.
It has access to all 16
registers on the chip,
and it has direct access to
the full instruction set.
This means that you have no
penalties when trying to do
anything within ARM mode.
Then there's the thumb processor mode,
which has 16-bit instructions,
access to only eight registers.
Well, still more than x86.
And it only has indirect access
to some of the instructions.
So there's a little bit of an overhead
involved in doing floating-point access.
One of the really nice things about thumb
mode is that thumb code is generally
25% to 30% smaller than ARM code.
This is huge when you're talking about
running some code on an embedded device.
Thank you.
Now, this smaller code is the big reason
why we decided to make Thumb the
default mode for the iPhone SDK.
Smaller is faster in an embedded system,
and smaller code uses less system memory.
System memory in the iPhone is the
most important system resource.
There's no virtual machine,
which means there's no swapping.
So you want to try to keep your
application as small as possible.
All right.
When do I want to use Arm?
Arm you're going to want to use
when you have either a lot of
floating point calculations or
routines that need lots of registers.
You probably don't run
into the second very much,
but you will run into the first.
So,
Let's talk a little bit about
the specifics of the SDK here,
so we can decide how
everything shapes up.
Well, first of all, it's GCC 4.0.
It's GCC 4.0 for the ARM processor.
We do support both modes
I've just talked about,
and it's going to be compatible in just
about every way with the Leopard GCC 4.0.
One of the big things,
and you'll hear about this later
in a lot of the iPhone sessions,
is that there is no Objective-C 2.0
garbage collection on the iPhone.
Therefore, at the compiler level,
we don't support this either.
That said, all of your portable code
should just recompile and work,
with a few exceptions, you know,
inline assembly, Indianess assumptions,
all the things that if you were here
for the PowerPC to Intel transition,
you've already had to deal
with and suffer through,
and so your code already handles that.
There are a few tweaks that you
can do to your code from just the
toolchain side to make sure that you
can get the best performance out.
One of which is, as I said,
there are gonna be times that
you're gonna wanna use ARM mode.
We only handle ARM on a file level basis.
What this means is that to use ARM mode,
you're gonna have to take all
the code out of your application
that you want to use ARM mode,
and you're gonna want to stick
that into a separate file.
And then within X code,
you're gonna want to use the UI.
You're gonna want to
uncheck compile for thumb.
And then all of that will
be compiled in ARM mode.
And then at runtime,
it will swap between thumb and
ARM mode for that invisibly to you.
So back to that precious
system resource of memory.
So if you're programming in C++,
there are a couple of very,
very easy things you can do
to help optimize for memory.
One of which,
you can avoid C++ exceptions.
And you can avoid
runtime type information.
Now, these two things are very,
very helpful in reducing the
memory used by your application.
Because they have some non-significant
overhead of just sitting in memory.
They're not significant
overhead at runtime,
but they are significant memory overhead.
So if you can,
you'll want to uncheck those two boxes
so you're not using either of those.
language features.
So that's a little bit
about the iPhone SDK.
There are tons of sessions here during
the week that'll tell you about the
more specific things for the iPhone.
You know,
the APIs that you'll be developing too,
the various different things,
different in OpenGL and
all that kind of stuff.
But from the compiler side,
everything should just
continue to work just fine,
which is one of the nice things about
using the same compiler as we transition
between the Mac development side that
you're used to and the iPhone SDK,
and it's warranted.
embedded side.
Now that said,
I would like to switch gears a little
bit and talk about Mac OS X development.
We have a huge array of
compilers in Mac OS X now.
To go over just some of the evolution,
we've had GCC 3.3,
which was quite some time ago.
We GMed GCC 4.0 in the Tiger timeframe.
And then, and now at the conference here,
last year, we gave a beta of GCC 4.2.
This year, with Xcode 3.1,
it's going to be a GM compiler.
And it's going to be the default compiler
that we're using for all of Snow Leopard.
and it would be a lot of great features.
However,
we haven't been sitting on our hands
there either because we also have the
LLVM compiler development side of things,
where also in Xcode 3.1,
we're shipping LLVM GCC 4.2.
Now, this has a GCC 4.2 frontend
and an LLVM backend.
And one of the other things
that we've been working on is
something called LLVM clang.
Now, this has an LLVM frontend
and an LLVM backend.
Now, I'm not going to talk much
more about those today.
However, Chris Lattner,
when he comes up here,
is going to talk in much
more detail about them.
Just wanted to whet the appetite a little
bit and talk about where we're going.
So with all these compilers,
probably your biggest question is, well,
what compiler do I want to use?
It comes down to a couple of questions.
One, you want to target Tiger and later.
Well, there's an easy choice there.
You want to use GCC 4.0.
and Eric Lange, and I'll be talking about
the new features of LLVM-GCC.
So, the new features of
LLVM-GCC supports everything
you need to target Tigran later.
However, you want to target Leopard,
you want to use some of the
cool new features that we've
been talking about here.
You want to use blocks,
you want to use all these different
features I'll be talking about later.
You want to use one of the
GCC 4.2 based compilers,
either GCC 4.2 or LLVM-GCC 4.2.
It has everything you need,
and it's quite a bit more advanced.
I gave you a big landscape,
a big development,
but a picture is really worth
more than a thousand words,
hopefully.
So, let's talk about the compiler
progression that we've had,
just to emphasize where things have been,
where things are now,
and where things are going.
So, back in the olden days,
we had GCC 3.3.
It GMed about Panther timeframe,
and we've moved it through
all the way through Xcode 3.1,
where we're going to leave it.
Then we have GCC 4.0.
GMed in the Tiger timeframe.
was our default compiler for Leopard.
It's going to be supported
for the coming future.
Today at the conference,
we're shipping both GCC 4.2 and
LLVM-GCC 4.2 when we release Xcode 3.1.
Now, we've had some default
compilers over time,
and this kind of gives you an idea of
where we've been going as we continue
our way down to the bottom right.
And as I said,
GCC 3.3 is no longer supported.
You really, really do need to move.
But hopefully I'll provide a
couple of compelling reasons for
you to want to do that here now,
as I talk about GCC 4.0.
Now, GCC 4.0 was our leopard default.
It is still supported now.
It's a great upgrade path from 3.3.
There's a porting guide that some very,
very talented people have on the
ADC website that gives you a lot of
information on what you're going to want
to do to upgrade from 3.3 to 4.0 or 4.2.
Provide lots of information there.
However, there are going to be no new
features added to GCC 4.0.
It's nothing else.
And we're only going to be
making the most critical of
bug fixes that are necessary.
Very, very critical bug fixes only.
However, as I said,
we did add some features.
In particular,
we added some security features
to GCC 4.0 that are around
now for GCC 4.0 and later,
especially in GCC 4.2.
So we added these security features
around the Leopard timeframe.
And since security is our
continuing emphasis here at Apple,
I'd like to talk to you
a little bit about them.
Now, with security,
there are lots of different
approaches you can make,
but there are no silver bullets
in writing secure applications.
There's no process you
can say by doing this,
by doing this, by doing this,
my app is magically secure.
However, the compiler can help you
out in a few different ways.
For example, we actually have stack
canaries in GCC 4.0.
Well, okay, how do those help?
Well, what we've got here is your
standard buffer overflow problem,
where we've got a buffer and
we're copying data that our
conceivably malicious attacker
has decided to put on the system.
All right, what does this look like?
OK, here's our stack frame.
So here's our little small
buffer there that's fixed length.
We can put up to 32 characters in it.
Wow.
And then we read from the outside,
where our malicious attacker
has decided to do something bad.
What he's going to do is he's going to
overwrite the return address and use that
to execute arbitrary code on the system.
and Eric are here.
So, we have a huge, huge problem.
He can execute as you,
or if you happen to have one
of those increased privilege
applications that you're writing,
he's executing as root on the system.
You really don't want to allow
this in your application,
so you want to try to
find some way of fixing
is also known as a sentinel,
if you've heard that term before.
So in our execution,
we again have our buffer here.
And then our malicious attacker comes in.
And yeah, our canary isn't very happy.
He's run out of fresh air.
So what happens with this and with
the canary is that it's a random
number generated at compile time,
or run time, I'm sorry, on the system.
And it's checked before we
return from the function.
So what happens is that instead
of using the return address
that was previously listed,
well,
When we find that there's been a
problem and you're going to end
up having a security violation,
you really want to abort the program
to minimize the risk to your user.
So we're going to go ahead and
abort your application there.
It's much better than having
malicious code and viruses and
everything else running on the system.
So, stack canaries are
particularly easy to use.
It's a simple command line option,
checkbox hopefully soon,
that you'll add via the Xcode UI.
You just use MySF stack protector,
it'll go ahead and enable it,
and for those of you worried,
it is a very,
very small performance impact to do this.
It's mostly not even worth talking about.
However,
there are a few things that we're
not going to catch using this.
We're not going to catch if, for example,
your data is not on the stack.
Therefore,
we've got another tool for the Arsenal to
handle these kinds of situations.
It's called object size checking.
It'll help protect against
non-stack overflows,
where you're just going to go ahead
and write across memory or right
across your passing of your data.
So if you happen to have your
fixed length buffer again there
in your more global memory,
what's going to happen is we're
going to rewrite that string copy
routine into a checking version,
where as you can see,
we're passing an extra argument
with the size of the buffer.
and Eric Lange,
and what happens is that either
at compile time if we can,
or at runtime,
we're going to see whether or
not we can determine that you're
writing past the end of your buffer.
And if you're writing past
the end of your buffer,
well, we're going to do the same thing
we did previously and abort your
application because it's not safe.
At compile time,
if we can determine though,
it's an even nicer thing.
It will give you a wonderful
warning so you can say,
"Oh, I've got a fixed link buffer here.
There's a problem." Now,
there There are some things that--
Well, we're not going to catch.
Like, if you decide,
I hate those standard C library routines,
I can write a better one myself.
I would like to mention as an aside,
it took me two times to
write this little for loop.
So I'd really suggest you use
the standard C library routines.
There are a few different reasons
you're going to want to do that,
not the least of which it
minimizes the amount of times
that you'll make some mistakes.
One, we can check these calls if you
pass in the correct options,
which I'll give you in a second.
And these are optimized by
Apple for every CPU we ship.
That means if you're using the standard
library routines and we ship some
new whippity-doo machine next week,
no forward-looking statements here,
I have no idea,
the string copy on that machine will
be optimized for that CPU already.
So it's a much better idea that you
want to use all the standard library
calls so that we can have all this
checking so we can have the performance.
Now, object-size checking is
also very easy to use.
It's a simple preprocessor
macro that you'll throw in.
This communicates into libc that you
want to turn on object-size checking,
which communicates to the compiler
that you want to use the checking
versions of lots of things.
It's very handy.
And as I said,
it is a couple of tools in your arsenal
that you can use to help make your
applications a little more secure.
So we made sure that these were in 4.0.
They came from a little
later in the compiler,
and they're also in GCC 4.2 as well.
So I'd like to spend about the rest of
my time up here talking a little bit
more about GCC 4.2 and why you should
move there as you're migrating off of 3.3
to at least 4.0 and hopefully into 4.2.
So 4.2, as I said,
is our Snow Leopard default compiler.
I mean,
Snow Leopard is built with GCC 4.2.
It has numerous front-end improvements.
We've got new parsers,
better C++ language conformance,
and all the cool new features
that you're going to hear
about here at the conference,
like blocks.
We also have a huge number of performance
enhancements going on behind the scenes.
Now, they are behind the scenes,
so here's a huge laundry list of them.
Now, there are tons more of
them than I've listed here,
which, you know, dead code elimination,
inter-procedural optimizations,
auto vectorization improvements,
visibility improvements.
As I said, lots more.
If you want the full list,
what you'll really want to do
is take a look at the release
notes that we're shipping if you
want to get more information.
Now, I did talk a little bit about here
about visibility improvements,
and visibility is usually an
obscure enough topic that it
might be worth talking about it
in a brief introduction here.
What visibility is, essentially,
is how do I control access to
my symbols with my source file,
my library, or my executable?
So what this means is that you
don't want all of your symbols
to be visible everywhere.
The minute you export a function
outside of your library,
outside of your executable,
someone's going to use it.
And therefore,
especially if you're like Apple,
you're going to be supporting it
until probably the day you die.
So, on the Mac, we have three available
visibility levels.
Up here at the top,
we have static visibility.
This means that it's only
visible within a file,
and it's all you have to worry about.
Now, down at the bottom,
we have whole program, or more the point,
external visibility.
And this is what you might
want to take careful care,
because you don't really want
to have all of your functions
visible from the outside.
One of the things that GCC allows
is what's called hidden visibility,
which basically means that it's
only visible within a library,
which is very handy when you don't
want to write huge export lists for
your C++ code that has all sorts
of name-mangled functions that you
get to enumerate based on guessing,
mostly, whether or not you want
to actually export those.
So the visibility improvements that
we've done in GCC 4.2 are very,
very handy for these sorts of occasions.
Basically,
a lot of the functions you're not
going to want to export end up
being things that take internal
types to your application,
private types.
So if you mark those
as visibility hidden,
the compiler is just going to go
ahead and automatically hide all the
functions that take that as a parameter.
It's very handy.
It helps minimize the amount
of time you're going to want to
spend looking at export lists and
doing all sorts of other things.
So it's kind of a new feature.
It's also a new optimization
because it helps us generate
code a little differently.
So it's very handy to use.
We get an awful lot of
feature requests for GCC.
We get more feature requests than anyone
would have time to look at and deal with.
However, probably one of the most popular
feature requests we get are,
"I have to turn on warnings everywhere.
I've got all of these warnings
and I want to turn on errors,
but I only want to turn on errors
for this warning or that warning or
this other warning over here." So,
let's say you've got this example
here where you want format
security and format warnings.
Now, format warnings are nice,
they're handy, they're useful,
good coding practice.
Format security is a
different matter entirely.
It's a security warning.
You want to know any time something
like that happens immediately.
But you don't want to turn all of your
warnings into errors using -wError.
One of the nice things that GCC 4.2
allows is that you can use -wError
equals whatever the warning name is.
So, that will go ahead and turn
only those warnings into errors.
It's very helpful for when you want
to turn a specific class of warnings
into errors but not have to worry
about it for all of your warnings.
Lastly, I'd like to talk to you a little
bit about multi-core computing.
So, Apple is shipping four and
eight-way machines today.
I don't know what we're
shipping next year.
It could be huge numbers
of cores on this ship.
Intel has announced 80
core chips running around.
The problem is, is that direct P-thread
programming is hard.
You run into synchronization issues.
You run into deadlocks.
There are all sorts of options on
OS X that enable you to do better
parallel programming without having to
worry about directly using Pthreads.
So let's take a look at a few of
Well, there's OpenCL,
there's NSOperation,
there's Grand Central Dispatch.
The real problem is that these all
require you to restructure your code.
They are wonderful if you're
writing new applications.
They're wonderful if you have the
time to restructure your code.
The problem is,
is that you may not want to do that,
or you may not have time.
So, can the compiler help you
out here a little bit?
Can you throw me something here?
I'd like to talk to you about OpenMP,
which is compiler-directed parallelism.
It's easy to use.
It's an open standard,
which means it's portable to
other compilers that implement it.
There are tons of compilers around
the world that implement it.
You can migrate your code easily
that uses OpenMP to GCC 4.2 as well.
As the graph shows,
it's also amazingly scalable.
So I did a simple Mandelbrot calculation.
I parallelized it with OpenMP.
And as you can see,
I'm getting almost linear scaling per
This is amazing.
It's very handy, very easy.
Well, okay, it's easy.
Example, example.
Well, this is how easy it is.
So you've got your simple for
loop here that's doing some
sort of pixely manipulation.
It's just straight line code, normally.
And you decide, well,
let's parallelize it.
All right, what's this little thing mean?
So pal and pragma OMP is just the
standard preface to every OMP directive.
Parallel for means I've got a for loop,
parallelize it for me.
That's all there is to it.
You've just parallelized this for loop.
It will go ahead and spawn off
additional threads as we go along.
Well, OK.
How does it work?
It really does work just like that.
You're executing your
straight line code here,
you fork off a bunch of threads,
you do all of your computation,
you join them all in,
and you start executing your
straight line code again.
And what's great is you can
do it over and over again.
So you can parallelize every for loop
just by a simple pragma and go through.
Well, okay.
and Eric Levy are the founders of Xcode.
They are the first developers to have
implemented Xcode in their own software.
They have been working
on a new application,
and they are working
on a new application.
The new application is called Xcode.
It is a new application that
is being developed in the
Now, with OpenMP,
we're talking about profitability
and safety in parallelizing loops.
Profitable means you want to
have a long enough running loop
that's worthwhile to parallelize.
Safety means that no
iteration depends on another.
As an example of something where, well,
we have a loop iteration that
does depend on something else,
we've decided to parallelize
this outer loop where we
have these two nested loops.
So J here is shared
among all these loops.
Well, there's a problem here.
We violated our safety property.
Now what this means is that since
all of our loop iterations modify J,
what we've now done is we've decided
to take this nice single running loop
and introduce synchronization issues.
So we're not just writing
in a straight line.
We're writing at almost random times into
this array where we have all of our loop
iterations modifying all over the place,
and it's corrupt data.
You're going to wonder what
the heck you did wrong.
Well, there's a very,
very simple solution to this.
J is private.
All you do is say that J is
private to every thread,
and what this does is it makes sure
that each loop gets its own copy of J.
It's a very simple way of making
sure that your nested loops can
also be parallelized simply,
easily, and safely.
Now this is just a brief overview
of what OpenMP really is.
OpenMP basically is a set of compiler
directives that you can use to
parallelize your program much easier.
They involve things like how
do you want to parallelize,
how do you share your data,
how do you synchronize your work,
and there's a lot more to it.
It is an open standard.
It's published on the web at OpenMP.org,
and it provides tons of information
on how you can parallelize
your programs easily with just
a few simple lines of code.
So, GCC 4.2 is a new major version that
we're going to be using in Snow Leopard.
and Eric Cronin.
It is our default compiler.
It also means it is binary
compatible to previous OS releases.
This is very, very handy.
All of our compilers
are binary compatible.
You can mix and match and switch easily.
We also have these symbol
visibility improvements that I was
talking about that help you reduce
the amount of symbols you are
exporting from all your programs,
which also have a side effect of helping
your performance by reducing load times.
gave you a feature, warnings that can be
upgraded to errors easily,
a laundry list of optimizations,
and OpenMP.
Now, there's a lot more to
GCC 4.2 than just this.
I really encourage all of you to see
the release notes for more information
on exactly what we've been doing.
Now, in addition to all of this,
we haven't really been sitting
on our hands here at Apple,
so I'd like to invite here up on
stage to talk about LLVM and all of
the exciting work we're doing there.
It's really great.
Thanks a lot, Eric.
So I'm here to talk about LLVM.
My name is Chris Lattner.
I am the architect of LLVM.
I also run the LLVM group here at Apple.
So first I thought I would
talk about what LLVM is,
because it's something
that's often misunderstood.
The two letters VM has some
very interesting connotations
that sometimes confuse people.
So if you boil LLVM down,
it's really a framework-based
approach to building compilers.
Okay?
And Apple does a lot with frameworks,
so this should be something
that's somewhat familiar.
But it basically means we have components
for building compiler stuff out of.
And so, for example,
we have components for building
optimizers and code generators.
We also have components
that plug into GCC,
this is our LLVM GCC front end.
We have components for doing
native LLVM front ends,
and so Clang,
which I'll talk about later,
is built on that.
LLVM has a lot of other pieces,
like a JIT compiler and
other things like that,
that are used elsewhere in the system.
But I'm going to be talking
mostly about static compilation,
or just drop-in batch
programming like you do with GCC.
So LLVM, of course,
is also an open source compiler.
Open source is very important to us.
If you go to LLVM.org,
you can see a lot of information.
I apologize a little
bit for the web page,
it's not the best organized,
but it gets some of the
important points across.
LLVM is widely developed,
and it's widely in use.
But it's not the best organized.
But it gets some of the
important points across.
LLVM is widely developed,
and it's widely in use.
by a lot of different people.
We have industry people like Apple,
we have research groups and
academia doing interesting things.
We also have a lot of individuals
who contribute on their spare time.
And so if you go to the webpage,
you can find out a lot
of this information.
So I thought I'd give a brief
introduction to where LLVM came
from and then we'll talk about
where it's going of course.
So LLVM actually started
in the year 2000.
When it first came out,
when we first started,
it was basically a research project.
And it was a research project in the
most traditional sense of it's broken
and useless and has a lot of potential,
but it's not really something
that you wanted to use.
In 2003, LLVM finally became usable to a
certain class of people and so
we had an open source release and
this was the 1.0 release of LLVM.
This again wasn't super usable, right?
It was basically at the point where
other researchers and other people
in related research groups could
use it to hack on it and improve
it and do things in specific areas.
However, LLVM has progressed
at an incredible pace.
The project has a release every
three to four months typically and
these releases keep improving the
compiler in a lot of different ways,
pushing performance and
compile time and compatibility,
all kinds of different things.
And so it's really been making
a lot of progress very quickly.
In 2005,
Apple started hiring people to work
full time on LLVM and has made a huge
commitment and investment in LLVM.
One example is that in 2007,
the Clang project,
which was actually started
by Apple engineers at Apple,
was open source and released back
to the project and continues this
development and it's maturing
in the open source community.
Finally, in Xcode 3.1,
we're of course shipping LLVM GCC and
I'd like to talk about that today.
and Eric Cronin.
We're going to be talking
about the new LLVM project.
One interesting point about this is
that Apple is actually the single
biggest contributor to the LLVM project.
Apple does a lot with open source.
Open source compilers are very important,
and we're driving the LLVM development.
We think this is a
really important thing.
So today, to start off with,
I want to talk about
what you can use today,
and what you can play with,
and how LLVM is useful.
So LLVM-GCC is a compiler.
It's a compiler just like GCC.
In fact, in Xcode,
there's a drop-down compiler
selection box where you can actually
pick the compiler you want to use.
You go to Build Settings for
your application,
and you can pick between GCC 3.3,
GCC 4.0, GCC 4.2, and LLVM-GCC 4.2.
If you're on the command line,
LLVM-GCC is a little bit well-hidden,
I'm told.
It's in the developer user bin directory.
And developer is wherever you
choose to install LLVM-GCC.
But you can run it directly
from the command line,
just like GCC.
If you're using Makefile, of course,
you can replace your CC commands
and things like that.
And it works just like a
GCC-compatible compiler.
[Transcript missing]
So one question now is,
you get the basic idea
that LLVM is a compiler.
And Eric, of course,
talked about how GCC is a compiler.
But what does it really
mean to be both things,
right?
So I thought I'd talk a little
bit about how compilers work and
how these pieces fit together.
So if you look at a
well-designed compiler,
a well-designed compiler, and, you know,
every compiler fudges a
little bit here and there,
but a well-designed compiler
basically has three pieces.
It has the parser, the front end.
The front end of a compiler is
the piece that is really in charge
of looking at your source code.
It parses the code.
It analyzes it for correctness.
It determines what it means.
It builds a syntax tree, right?
And this is the part that emits
warning messages and errors.
This is the part that parses
all the command line options,
okay?
[Transcript missing]
So if we get back to LLVM and GCC,
GCC is designed very
much like this picture.
It has a front end,
which uses the GCC parsers,
has an optimizer,
and has a code generator.
So LLVM-GCC is basically
a modification of GCC,
where we take the GCC optimizer and
the code generator and replace them
with pieces from the LLVM project.
Now LLVM is designed to be very modular,
and so this is a pretty straightforward,
well, relatively speaking,
fairly straightforward thing to do.
But basically this means that
now we have the same front end,
the same parser as GCC 4.2.
This means that all the logic for
instantiating templates and all the
name resolution and objective C and
all that stuff is the exact same
between GCC 4.2 and LLVM-GCC 4.2.
We also reuse the same runtime libraries,
lib standard C++, lib GCC.
All the stuff is exactly the same.
So furthermore,
we've worked really hard to make
the back end and the optimizer as
compatible with GCC as possible.
What this means is that you can actually
take two different files and on a file
basis mix and match your code with GCC,
and all the different versions
of GCC are compatible,
and so you can mix and match
LLVM-GCC compiled code with
GCC compiled code on the system.
Now this is actually really important
because you may not necessarily be mixing
and matching on object file boundaries,
but you're very likely to be caught up
in the process of making a compiler.
So if you're going to be calling into
code compiled by some other compiler,
and so if you have, you know,
you build your application with LLVM-GCC,
you really want to be able to compile
into a foundation which may be
compiled with a different compiler.
And so the output of
the back ends are very,
very compatible between
these two compilers,
and this is true across all
three supported architectures.
So the output of these compilers are
these object files represented with
the beautiful dots on our hard drive,
and then they go into the linker,
and then that produces your object file.
So this is your executable.
I guess we're building Xcode.
But so the question then may be, okay,
we've done all this work.
We've replaced this optimizer.
We have a new code generator.
Well, what is the benefit of doing this?
Well, so basically,
if you're talking about the optimizer,
the optimizer is really in charge of,
or is capable of impacting three things,
right?
One is, how good is the code
coming out of the compiler?
How optimized is it?
How fast does it run?
The second is,
how fast does the compiler itself run,
right?
How fast do we get code
out of the compiler?
The third is, well,
is there room for new features?
Right, and everybody loves features, and,
well, to some extent, I guess.
So let's talk about
features to begin with,
and the one biggest feature
that we have in LLVM-GCC is
called link time optimization.
Linktime Optimization is something
that a lot of people have been
asking for for a long time,
and it's very straightforward with
the architecture of the LLVM compiler.
[Transcript missing]
So, we're talking in very vague terms
about how compilers are good
and how performance is good.
I want to talk about a
couple of specific examples,
okay?
H.264 is an incredibly
important video codec at Apple.
It's highly optimized.
And so what we're going to do is we're
going to look at the H.264 decoder on the
Mac compiled by both GCC and LLVM-GCC at
different optimization levels.
And across the bottom here,
we'll have bars for O2, O3,
and O4 and compare the
performance across here.
So, of course, with decoding,
decoding video, higher is better.
And so if we look at O2, for example,
what we've basically done
is we've taken H.264,
compiled with LLVM-GCC 4.2,
also compiled it with GCC 4.2
and compared the performance.
And so in this case,
you can see that LLVM-GCC is
actually producing code at O2,
which they're both compiled at O2,
that runs almost 7% faster.
So this is actually a pretty
impressive result when you consider
the fact that H.264 has been highly
optimized by hand and tuned for GCC.
It uses hand-vectorized code using
the SSE intrinsics in XMM and Trin,
for example.
And people have paid very close
attention to the performance
of the code coming out.
So 7% is pretty good.
If we look at O3, actually,
it turns out that the gap widens.
So O3 optimizes me harder.
It enables new features like inlining.
It enables loop enrolling.
It enables some loop transformations,
things like that, right?
The tradeoff is you say,
"I'm okay with bigger code and slower
compiles as long as I get faster
code." That's roughly what it means.
And in this case, it's very true.
H.264 is a large C++ source base,
or the H.264 decoder,
and so inlining is very important.
And all these kinds of things
are very important for it.
And so here you see that both --
the performance of both compiled
versions of the program go faster,
which is good.
But actually,
LLVM-GCC increases its lead a little bit,
and now it's up to 9% faster.
Another interesting detail
about this is that in this case,
O3 with LLVM-GCC actually runs -- or O2
compiled code with LLVM-GCC actually runs
faster than O3 compiled code with GCC,
which is also a nice result.
So let's talk about 04.
04 turns on optimization across files.
So in this case,
we find that 04 is a small incremental
improvement over 03 on this code base.
Again, this is highly optimized code,
and so we think this is
actually a really good result.
They've already done most of the things
that link time optimization gets by hand.
So they've moved file, you know,
inline functions into headers,
and they've done all kinds of
stuff to really tune their code.
And so getting another 3% improvement,
we think, is actually really good.
And again,
going from 65 to 66.8 frames a second is
a big deal in the video decoding world,
because you're potentially
decoding movies to do editing,
and you're spending a lot of time
sitting with a lot of content,
and the faster you can decode video,
the faster you can get your jobs done,
particularly if you're editing.
So the question, of course, is, okay,
this is one axis of
goodness for compilers,
right,
which is how fast the code comes out.
Another axis is compile time,
and if it's taking us, you know,
ten times as long to get performance,
it's not necessarily as interesting.
So let's look at the same code base,
H.264.
Again, this is a large C++ code base.
This is real-world code.
It's been hand-tuned.
It's had a lot of history behind it.
It's real-world.
So instead of looking at performance now,
I'm going to look at compile
times across optimization levels,
and we'll see how, you know,
03 time takes off.
And 03 time takes longer than 02,
for example.
And so one of the things that we
consistently see with LLVM GCC is
that if you turn on optimizations,
LLVM GCC compiles code approximately
30% faster than GCC 4.2.
And this is a big deal.
So this is not a single case either.
We see this consistently across
a vast number of code bases.
And again, when you're optimizing,
you spend a lot of time in the optimizer.
So the time you spend in the optimizer
is a very big impact on this.
At O0, you're not spending much
time in the optimizer,
so it doesn't really matter
how fast the optimizer goes.
So let's look at O3 now.
O3, of course, takes longer than O2,
because we turn on inlining
and we optimize harder.
So at O3, both compilers slow down.
But actually, it turns out that
LLVM-GCC does slow down.
It takes 20 seconds longer
to compile this code.
But it's still about 30% faster.
In fact, it's 36% faster in this case.
And so it's also very good.
So the big question now is, OK,
we have O4.
O4 involves a huge amount
of work for the compiler.
So at compile time,
we're doing basically as much
optimization as we're doing at O3.
Because it's O3 plus work in the linker.
We don't do code generation
at O4 during compile time.
We do it in the linker.
But we have to read in
the entire application,
which, again,
is a large C++ source space, into memory,
optimize across all these files,
run code generation, and produce output.
So the question is,
how long does it take to
do all this extra work?
Well,
when we set out to find these numbers,
we were actually really surprised.
and Eric Lange, and the rest of the team.
So,
this is not something you should expect,
unfortunately.
In general,
we see that 04 is about 20% slower
than 03 on most source spaces.
And so, across a lot of source spaces,
we find that 04 with
LLVM-GCC actually takes about the
same amount of time as 03 with GCC.
[Transcript missing]
So, in summary,
I want to wrap up what LLVM-GCC is.
The takeaway points are it's
very compatible with GCC.
We've stressed this really hard.
It's very important for us to be able
to take an existing code base and
drop in LLVM-GCC and just build it.
It's important because we don't want to
have to tweak the source code to change,
you know, picky details in the parser.
We don't have to change our make
files to work around differences in
options and all that kind of stuff.
Compatibility is key.
Of course, LLVM-GCC supports the
languages that GCC supports,
which is important.
And we support code generation
for the same set of processors.
The one missing one is PowerPC 64.
So across a large
number of source spaces,
we find that LLVM-GCC compiles code
significantly faster than GCC does
when optimizations are enabled.
And we typically find about 5%
to 10% better code generation
at one specific O level.
So if you compare O2 to O2 or O3 to O3.
So again, LLVM-GCC has a new feature.
A major new feature is
link time optimization.
And with link time optimization,
you can get significantly
better performance than with O3,
for example.
And a lot of the benefit,
the runtime benefit,
the code generation benefit,
depends on your source space.
If it's heavily optimized or
maybe only consists of one file,
link time optimization
won't help you as much.
If it's a code base that's
seen a lot of evolution,
it's been hacked on by
lots of different people,
then link time optimization can
sometimes be 20%, 30% speed up.
And we've seen that in real world code.
So LLVM-GCC,
the big takeaway picture is that
we're focusing on performance.
Performance, both of the generated
code and of the compiler,
and we really want to
keep pushing this forward,
and we'll continue to do that.
So LLVM-GCC is something
that exists today.
You have it in Xcode 3.1.
It exists on Snow Leopard.
I want to talk about something
that doesn't exist today.
Well, it exists, but you don't have it,
unless you go to the website.
So I'll give you a little
teaser on what Clang is.
So the problem that we've found
with LLVM-GCC is we can do a lot
of work to speed up the optimizer.
And we really care about compile times
at Apple because we have huge code bases.
And we have huge code bases that
we try to build very frequently
because lots of things are changing,
right?
And when you're building huge
code bases really frequently,
you care about compile time.
Furthermore, we really care about O0.
At O0, which is usually what you
build your code at to debug,
if I'm hacking on my code,
I want to change something, compile it,
run it, debug it, fix something,
compile it, run it, debug it,
over and over and over again,
the speed of the compiler really matters.
And at O0,
no time is being spent in the optimizer,
and so there's not really much you
can do by changing the optimizer.
One of the goals that we have is
we want to build a new front end.
And it's aiming at solving a
lot of problems that we've seen.
One, the basic idea we want to do,
the basic idea of the project
is we want to take and build
a new C++ front end for LLVM.
So we're going to be as
compatible as we can with GCC.
Now here, this will be a new front end,
so it will be a completely new parser.
So there may be bugs here and there.
But we'll try really hard.
And if you file bugs, we'll fix them.
So the big architectural
difference between a Clang-based
compiler and a GCC front end-based
compiler is that with Clang,
we can embed it into Xcode.
Well, what does that really mean?
Well, embedding into Xcode
has a lot of benefits.
It means that we can improve Xcode.
It means that Xcode can use
Clang to do indexing or factoring
or other operations like that.
It also means that embedding into Xcode,
you can do a lot of interesting
optimizations for compile time.
So you can do caching across compiles.
When Xcode invokes GCC,
every time GCC starts up, or LLVM-GCC,
it has to relearn everything
about the program.
It needs to learn where
all the header files are,
it needs to search the hard drive
to find all those pound includes.
And as soon as it's done
the 1C file or M file,
it goes on to the next one,
and it has to relearn all that stuff,
right?
Well, there's no reason to do this when
you're compiling a large code base,
right?
The IDE has all that information.
We can cache that.
We can do a lot more with that.
A side note is that even though
we're going to embed into Xcode,
we still really care
about command line use,
and so we'll continue to support that.
So Clang, as I mentioned before,
is an open source project.
It has a website, clang.llvm.org.
It has a lot of information
about our motivation,
what we're trying to do.
You can get the code there,
you can play with it.
I really want to talk about four
major features of Clang today.
So the major feature number
one is that when you compare
Clang head-to-head against GCC,
against time spent in the front end,
which is F syntax only effectively,
right now we see that Clang is about
two to three times faster than GCC.
So we see two to three times speedups
across a broad number of C and
Objective-C based applications.
So this is real world stuff
parsing huge source bases,
for example, Xcode.
So the sub-bullet there is
actually really important,
though, because this is, again,
head-to-head comparison
doing exactly what GCC does.
So this is straight out engineering
improvement in the front end.
Of course, we don't want to run
exactly the way GCC does,
because that's very limiting.
We actually want to embed
this thing into Xcode.
And when you start taking advantage
of some of the information you have,
we think we can push this
significantly farther and get several
multipliers of speedup in there.
And we'll have to see.
But this is front-end time.
This is a project in development.
We think that there's
a lot of headroom left.
Second, we really care about the user
interface of the compiler.
So how often have you
gone to compile something,
and the compiler basically spits
out a big mass of error messages,
and you have no idea
what it's talking about,
right?
Well, the error messages and the warnings
coming out of the compiler are
basically its user interface,
right?
The user interface is
kind of a nasty one,
because it's usually
through the command line.
But if you compile code with Clang today,
if you check it out from
the open source repository,
you'll see that it gives
really good error messages.
And the error messages not
only are worded well so that
they tell you what's going on,
in this case, you know,
that you have some invalid operations,
it actually highlights the line of
source code where the error occurs,
and then pinpoints the location of the
error and the sub-expressions involved.
And what this means is that in this case,
there's four pluses, for example,
on this line.
It identifies the exact
plus that is the problem,
and it identifies the sub-expressions.
This is really important and very
useful when you have precedence
problems and other things like that.
In Xcode,
you can imagine that there are bubbles.
You can see that there are bubbles.
You can see that there are bubbles around
the sub-expressions and other nice,
pretty things,
but we'll get there someday.
So, which is the third bullet,
Xcode integration, right?
So we really care about Xcode.
And furthermore,
what we really want is we really want
to build good programmer tools for C++,
Objective-C, Objective-C++ programmers.
And this is really what's
motivating all this work.
We really want to build the first
class UI for developing code,
and that is Xcode.
Fourth, and this is something that
we'll talk about soon,
is a brand new tool that's in
development for automatically
finding bugs in your code.
And so this is just a teaser on Clang.
We'll have a full session on LLVM,
actually.
The session is Thursday at 5 o'clock.
This session will talk about a
lot more detail about LLVM-GCC,
including how link time
optimization works,
how to use it, examples of optimization.
Also includes details on Clang,
more performance information for Clang,
more detailed compile numbers,
things like that,
more of the architecture design.
We also talk about a
new bug-finding tool,
which is in development.
This bug-finding tool is really designed
to take advantage of the information you
get from a compiler as it parses code
to analyze your code much more deeply
and point out problems that you have.
For example, memory leaks,
things like that.
So with all of that,
it's a very brief introduction.
I want to wrap up the session
with saying where we are,
where we're going.
So there's a lot of compilers here.
We have GCC, GCC 4.0 on the iPhone.
If you're building for the iPhone,
your choice is simple.
You have one compiler, GCC 4.0.
It's a great compiler.
This compiler has been used to build
all the source code for the iPhone.
On the Mac, you have more choice.
3.3 you really want to get off of,
so I'm not going to talk about that.
4.0 is a very stable compiler.
4.0 is most important if you're
building applications that
have to run on Tiger machines.
If those apps have to
run on Tiger machines,
unfortunately,
4.0 is your only choice there.
However, if you're willing to develop
your app for Leopard and later,
you have other good choices.
So LLVM-GCC 4.2,
GCC 4.2 are two really good compilers.
They're available.
They have many new features over 4.0,
and I'd love for you to try them out.
[Transcript missing]